Update contributing guide with etiquette section (#5611)
pymc-devs/pymc: CONTRIBUTING.md

We appreciate being notified of problems with the existing PyMC code. We prefer that issues be filed the on [Github Issue Tracker](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues), rather than on social media or by direct email to the developers.

Please verify that your issue is not being currently addressed by other issues or pull requests by using the GitHub search tool to look for key words in the project issue tracker.

Filter on the ["beginner friendly"](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22beginner+friendly%22) label for issues which are good for new contributors.

## Etiquiette for code contributions
* When you start working working on an issue, open a `Draft` pull request as soon as you're doing the first steps (see steps below).
* Before opening a PR with a new feature, please propose it in an [Issue](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues) or [Discussion](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/discussions) with the maintainers. Depending on the proposal we might direct you to other places such as [`pymc-experimental`](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-experimental) or [`pymc-examples`](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples).

> * Any issue without an open pull request is available for work. However if a pull request has no recent activity it may be closed, or taken over by someone else.

Reviewer: We should set a time here. What does "recent activity" mean? I have no idea and not knowing if they are supposed to respond within 24h or 3 days to prevent their PR from being closed is very stressful.

Author: I didn't want to set a time because it depends a lot on context. If it's a PR to fix a failing CI on `main`, we might take over after a few hours, but if it's a PR adding a new complicated step method or distribution we'll often wait weeks.

It's really a matter of good judgement and I wouldn't add a rule preventing that

Reviewer: It doesn't need to be a rule. We know that this will depend on context, and it will also depend on availability, if we are all busy with other things or even other PRs we can leave a PR unchecked for longer independently of context. But many (or most) of the readers of this document/section do not have much/any context so we need to provide that:

* Will they be expected to answer in a matter of hours? No except if very rare exceptions you'll probably never find youself in. There may be PRs where such a fast cadence is needed if they are needed to fix CI on `main` or to fix the documentation website.
* Can they expect to work on a PR only once every 2 weeks? No
* If the PR takes longer than expected and you are required to stop working on it for a while, what happens? Answered already in a point below.

Even expert pymc users might not have any context when it comes to contributing to open source.

Author: ```suggestion
* Any issue without an open pull request is available for work. However if a pull request has no recent activity it may be closed, or taken over by someone else. What is considered "recent" will depend on the urgency, and everybody is asked to remain calm and use good judgement.
```
Is this better?
Otherwise, please apply another suggestion.

Reviewer 2: How's this? Also note I'm totally fine if all this is rejected and we go with something else. Just trying to add ideas to consider :D 

```suggestion
* Any issue without an open pull request is available for work. 
   * If a pull request has no recent activity it may be closed, or taken over by someone else.
   * The specific timeframe for recent is hard to define as it depends on the contributor the specific code change, and other contextual factors. As a rule of thumb in a normal pull request with no other blockers there typically is activity every couple of days.
   * The core devs will make their best judgement when opting to close PRs.
```

* Contributing or improving the documentation (`docs`) or examples (`pymc/examples`)
* Submitting issues related to bugs or desired enhancements

## Opening issues

We appreciate being notified of problems with the existing PyMC code. We prefer that issues be filed the on [Github Issue Tracker](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues), rather than on social media or by direct email to the developers.

Please verify that your issue is not being currently addressed by other issues or pull requests by using the GitHub search tool to look for key words in the project issue tracker.

Filter on the ["beginner friendly"](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22beginner+friendly%22) label for issues which are good for new contributors.

> ## Etiquiette for code contributions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Etiquette for code contributions
```

> * When you start working working on an issue, open a `Draft` pull request as soon as you're doing the first steps (see steps below).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When you start working working on an issue, open a `Draft` pull request as soon as you make your first commit (see steps below).
```

> * Before opening a PR with a new feature, please propose it in an [Issue](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues) or [Discussion](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/discussions) with the maintainers. Depending on the proposal we might direct you to other places such as [`pymc-experimental`](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-experimental) or [`pymc-examples`](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Before opening a PR with a new feature, please make a proposal by opening an [issue](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues) or [Discussion](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/discussions) with the maintainers. Depending on the proposal we might direct you to other places such as [`pymc-experimental`](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-experimental) or [`pymc-examples`](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc-examples).
```

* Any issue without an open pull request is available for work.
   * If a pull request has no recent activity it may be closed, or taken over by someone else.
   * The specific timeframe for "recent" is hard to define as it depends on the contributor the specific code change, and other contextual factors. As a rule of thumb in a normal pull request with no other blockers there is typically activity every couple of days.

>    * The core devs will make their best judgement when opting to close PRs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * The core devs will make their best judgement when opting to close PRs or reassign them to others.
```

> * In accordance with the previous point, please don't make unrealistic "_I want to work on this issue_" pledges.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If unsure if an issue ticket is available feel free to ask in the issue ticket. Note however, that per the previous point an open pull request is way to claim an issue ticket. Please do not make unrealistic pledges in the issue tickets.
```

> * It's okay if priorities change, but please communicate if you can't get a PR to the finish line, or that you're taking a break. Depending on the change (urgent bugfix vs. new feature) others might want to take over to get the work done.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It's okay if you are delayed or need to take a break, but please leave a comment in the pull request if you cannot get it to a state where it can be merged. Depending on the change (urgent bugfix vs. new feature) the core devs can determine if the PR needs to be reassigned to get the work done.
```

## Contributing code via pull requests

While issue reporting is valuable, we strongly encourage users who are inclined to do so to submit patches for new or existing issues via pull requests. This is particularly the case for simple fixes, such as typos or tweaks to documentation, which do not require a heavy investment of time and attention.

Contributors are also encouraged to contribute new code to enhance PyMC's functionality, also via pull requests. Please consult the [PyMC documentation](https://pymc-devs.github.io/pymc/) to ensure that any new contribution does not strongly overlap with existing functionality.

The preferred workflow for contributing to PyMC is to fork the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/), clone it to your local machine, and develop on a feature branch.

### Steps

> 1. Read the [Contributing etiquette section](#etiquiette-for-code-contributions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Read the [Etiquette for code contributions](#etiquette-for-code-contributions).
```

   git add modified_files
   git commit
   ```

   to record your changes locally.

1. After committing, sync with the base repository in case there have been any changes:
   ```bash
   git fetch upstream
   git rebase upstream/main
   ```

   Then push the changes to the fork in your GitHub account with:

   ```bash
   git push -u origin my-cool-bugfix
   ```

1. Go to the GitHub web page of your fork of the PyMC repo. Click the 'Pull request' button to open a pull request to the main project. Our CI pipeline will start running tests* and project maintainers can start reviewing your changes.
   <sup>*If this is your first contribution, the start of some CI jobs will have to be approved by a maintainer.</sup>

### Pull request checklist

We recommended that your contribution complies with the following guidelines before you submit a pull request:

*  If your pull request addresses an issue, please use the pull request title to describe the issue and mention the issue number in the pull request description. This will make sure a link back to the original issue is created.

*  All public methods must have informative docstrings with sample usage when appropriate.

> *  Please select "Create draft pull request" in the dropdown menu when opening your pull request to indicate a work in progress. This is to avoid duplicated work, to get early input on implementation details or API/functionality, or to seek collaborators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  Please select "Create draft pull request" in the dropdown menu when opening your pull request to indicate a work in progress. This most importantly will add a claim to the issue ticket if there is one. It also will help avoid duplicated work, to get early input on implementation details or API/functionality, or to seek collaborators.
  *  In the pull request form in Github paste the link to the issue ticket in the body so Github will link the two together
```

* Contributing or improving the documentation (`docs`) or examples (`pymc/examples`)
* Submitting issues related to bugs or desired enhancements

## Opening issues

We appreciate being notified of problems with the existing PyMC code. We prefer that issues be filed the on [Github Issue Tracker](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues), rather than on social media or by direct email to the developers.

Please verify that your issue is not being currently addressed by other issues or pull requests by using the GitHub search tool to look for key words in the project issue tracker.

Filter on the ["beginner friendly"](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22beginner+friendly%22) label for issues which are good for new contributors.

## Etiquiette for code contributions

> When you start working working on an issue, open a `Draft` pull request as soon as you're doing the first steps.

Reviewer: I think it would also be good to add something along the lines of work on open issues, don't submit PRs for new features that have not been discussed in an issue/discussion/discourse with the core contributors.

Author: ```suggestion
When you start working working on an issue, open a `Draft` pull request as soon as you're doing the first steps.
Before opening a PR with a new feature, please first open an Issue or Discussion to propose it and discuss the new feature with the maintainers.
```

Reviewer: sounds good

> Make sure to mention the issue number in the PR description or commit message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure to mention the issue number in the PR description.
```

I think here keeping it simple and not providing options the readers potentially won't know how to choose between is better.

Author: ```suggestion
Make sure to mention the issue number in the PR description and commit message.
```

Reviewer: Why the duplication? I think I have never used issue numbers in commit messages, should I have been doing that?

Reviewer 3: You can do that. It does make issue threads awfully verbose if a PR has a lot of rebases + force pushes, because a new automatic message is added every time that is done.

Reviewer: If I always add the links to all relevant issues in the PR description, is there an advantage in adding them also in commit messages?

Reviewer 3: Not really. You can always go from a commit to its PR and then to the original issue

Author: The links from the description can get lost depending on how the PR is merged.
> You can always go from a commit to its PR and then to the original issue

Yes, but not the other way around unless the issue number ends up in a commit message on `main`.
Or at least only with a detour through the PR.

> This way others can see that the issue is being worked on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will automatically add a link to the PR in the issue ticket as well.
By doing this way others can see that the issue is being worked on and has a pull request.
```

> Comments like "I want to work on this issue" will be ignored.

Reviewer 3: They won't exactly be ignored... I guess what you want to convey is that an issue is not exclusive to someone else, just because they commented on it first. I think it is still polite to ask the original person if they are still planning to work on it or if they can take over. I've seen several people saying "I don't have time, thanks for asking. Yes take over"

Reviewer 3: Exactly as you say, recurring contributors don't have the need to do this, because they know they will open a PR fast enough to not be worth it. But I think asking for "permission" is still something new contributors feel the need for, and I don't think it's necessarily bad.

Edit: I wouldn't want to foster an environment where people feel the need to "rush" to claim something. Also opening draft PRs early on wastes CI compute

Reviewer: I commented https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/pull/5611#discussion_r829896757 trying to not change the meaning. We should first agree on that before working on the wording. 

In case it helps, here is ArviZ guidance: https://arviz-devs.github.io/arviz/contributing/contributing_prs.html

This is because we value getting things done over pledges and found that waiting weeks for follow-ups to such pledges slows down the progress.

> Similarly, we may decide to close or take over pull requests where the author is not responsive.

Reviewer: This paragraph feels a bit harsh and I think is prone to be misunderstood. Some suggestions:

Issues are not assigned nor reserved via issue comments. Our way of avoiding duplicated work is with draft PRs and
by not opening PRs that overlap with other _active PRs_. We will still track and be active answering any questions posted
on issues to help you open a PR for it.

_Active PRs_ means currently open PRs whose author has commented on or commited in the last week. Once a PR becomes inactive, core contributors can choose to take over or close the PR. The decision will depend on each case and the availability of core contributors and will not necessarly happen exactly on the 7th day of inactivity.

Reviewer: see https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/pull/5611#discussion_r829891767 first

Author: Yeah it is my intention to strongly discourage the reservation behavior.

At the same time, I am disillusioned about lengthy rules and definitions.
Up to today I have not even once opened the contributing guide for ArviZ.

The most important thing is that we agree on the procedure. 2 % of contributors will have read these rules before doing their first PR, or commenting "I want to work on this".

Reviewer: > At the same time, I am disillusioned about lengthy rules and definitions.

They should not be excessively long, but they should be explicit and clear. Now that I have some experience in open source I often skip them (if I am fixing a typo in their docs for example) but bad contributing guides have driven me away from more fleshy PRs in some libraries.

> The most important thing is that we agree on the procedure.

200% agreed on this, if we don't agree on this we'll end up giving incoherent advise which can be even worse than having no docs

> Similarly, we may decide to close or take over pull requests where the author is not responsive.

Reviewer 2: I agree with both comments, the language is harsh and I'm not confident in the proposed process.

Here's my proposal

Any issue without an open pull request is available for work. However if your pull request is more than two weeks old with no activity and someone else expresses interest reserve the right to either close it, or let someone else take it over.

## Contributing code via pull requests

While issue reporting is valuable, we strongly encourage users who are inclined to do so to submit patches for new or existing issues via pull requests. This is particularly the case for simple fixes, such as typos or tweaks to documentation, which do not require a heavy investment of time and attention.

Contributors are also encouraged to contribute new code to enhance PyMC's functionality, also via pull requests. Please consult the [PyMC documentation](https://pymc-devs.github.io/pymc/) to ensure that any new contribution does not strongly overlap with existing functionality.

The preferred workflow for contributing to PyMC is to fork the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/), clone it to your local machine, and develop on a feature branch.

> ### Steps

Reviewer: first step should now be reading the etiquette section

> 1. Fork the [project repository](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/) by clicking on the 'Fork' button near the top right of the main repository page. This creates a copy of the code under your GitHub user account.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Read the [Contributing etiquette section](#etiquiette-for-code-contributions).

1. Fork the [project repository](https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/) by clicking on the 'Fork' button near the top right of the main repository page. This creates a copy of the code under your GitHub user account.
```
